# Python for Data Analysis

## NumPy

NumPy, short for Numerical Python, is one of the most important foundational packages for numerical computing in Python.

While NumPy provides a computational foundation for general numerical data processing, many readers will want to use pandas as the basis for most kinds of statistics or analytics, especially on tabular data. pandas also provides some more domain-specific functionality like time series manipulation, which is not present in NumPy.


### The NumPy ndarray
One of the key features of NumPy is its N-dimensional array object, or ndarray, which is a fast, flexible container 
for large datasets in Python. Arrays enable you to perform mathematical operations on whole blocks of data using 
similar syntax to the equivalent operations between scalar elements.

For example,
```shell
In [12]: import numpy as np

# Generate some random data
In [13]: data = np.random.randn(2, 3)

In [14]: data
Out[14]: 
array([[-0.2047,  0.4789, -0.5194],
       [-0.5557,  1.9658,  1.3934]])

In [16]: data + data
Out[16]: 
array([[-0.4094,  0.9579, -1.0389],
       [-1.1115,  3.9316,  2.7868]])
```

An ndarray is a generic multidimensional container for homogeneous data; that is, all of the elements must be the 
same type. Every array has a shape, a tuple indicating the size of each dimension, and a dtype, an object describing 
the data type of the array.

For example,
```shell
In [17]: data.shape
Out[17]: (2, 3)

In [18]: data.dtype
Out[18]: dtype('float64')
```

dtypes are a source of NumPy’s flexibility for interacting with data coming from other systems. In most cases they 
provide a mapping directly onto an underlying disk or memory representation, which makes it easy to read and write 
binary streams of data to disk and also to connect to code written in a low-level language like C or Fortran. The 
numerical dtypes are named the same way: a type name, like float or int, followed by a number indicating the number 
of bits per element. A standard double-precision floating-point value (what’s used under the hood in Python’s `float` 
object) takes up 8 bytes or 64 bits. Thus, this type is known in NumPy as `float64`.

`np.save` and `np.load` are the two workhorse functions for efficiently saving and loading array data on disk. Arrays 
are saved by default in an uncompressed raw binary format with file extension `.npy`.

## Pandas

pandas adopts significant parts of NumPy’s style of array-based computing, especially array-based functions and a 
preference for data processing without for loops.

While pandas adopts many coding idioms from NumPy, the biggest difference is that pandas is designed for working 
with tabular or heterogeneous data. NumPy, by contrast, is best suited for working with homogeneous numerical array 
data.

### Series

A Series is a one-dimensional array-like object containing a sequence of values (of similar types to NumPy types) 
and an associated array of data labels, called its index.

For example,

```shell
In [13]: obj = pd.Series([4, 7, -5, 3])

In [14]: obj
Out[14]: 
0    4
1    7
2   -5
3    3
dtype: int64
```

and

```shell
In [17]: obj2 = pd.Series([4, 7, -5, 3], index=['d', 'b', 'a', 'c'])

In [18]: obj2
Out[18]: 
d    4
b    7
a   -5
c    3
dtype: int64

In [19]: obj2.index
Out[19]: Index(['d', 'b', 'a', 'c'], dtype='object')
```

Compared with NumPy arrays, you can use labels in the index when selecting single values or a set of values.

Another way to think about a Series is as a fixed-length, ordered dict, as it is a mapping of index values to data 
values.

### DataFrame

A DataFrame represents a rectangular table of data and contains an ordered collection of columns, each of which can 
be a different value type (numeric, string, boolean, etc.). The DataFrame has both a row and column index; it can be 
thought of as a dict of Series all sharing the same index.

For example,

```shell
data = {'state': ['Ohio', 'Ohio', 'Ohio', 'Nevada', 'Nevada', 'Nevada'],
        'year': [2000, 2001, 2002, 2001, 2002, 2003],
        'pop': [1.5, 1.7, 3.6, 2.4, 2.9, 3.2]}
frame = pd.DataFrame(data)

In [47]: frame
Out[47]: 
    state  year  pop
0    Ohio  2000  1.5
1    Ohio  2001  1.7
2    Ohio  2002  3.6
3  Nevada  2001  2.4
4  Nevada  2002  2.9
5  Nevada  2003  3.2
```

### Index
pandas’s Index objects are responsible for holding the axis labels and other metadata (like the axis name or names). 
Any array or other sequence of labels you use when constructing a Series or DataFrame is internally converted to an 
Index.

```shell
In [78]: obj = pd.Series(range(3), index=['a', 'b', 'c'])

In [79]: index = obj.index

In [80]: index
Out[80]: Index(['a', 'b', 'c'], dtype='object')

In [81]: index[1:]
Out[81]: Index(['b', 'c'], dtype='object')
```

## Distributed Pandas
https://www.databricks.com/session_na21/koalas-does-koalas-work-well-or-not


## Reference
https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/python-for-data/9781491957653/
